Is Your Roof Ready for Spring?

Spring is finally here, and as you start the process of spring cleaning and beautifying your yard, you should take time to check how your roof handled the winter. Winter months can be hard on your home and if your roof has endured any type of damage it could lead to even greater problems in the spring.

Now is the perfect time to make sure your home is ready for a beautiful spring. There are things that you, as a homeowner, can do to ensure your roof is prepared for the spring and summer storms ahead.

Check and Clean Gutters

It’s important to maintain clean and clear gutters on your home. Clear out any debris that has gathered in them over the winter months. You should also check the walls around your gutters and under the eaves for water stains or spots. This could be a sign that your gutters are not allowing water to flow freely to the ground.
Check Your Attic

Scanning the attic is an easy task you can do on your own. Inspect the underside of the roof deck and rafters in your attic for water stains, black marks or mold and check the insulation in your attic for mildew. Finding mold or mildew could indicate that your roof has a leak.

Trim Your Trees

Spring is a good time to inspect the trees around your house for branches that are weak or breaking. Any limbs that are at risk of falling onto your roof should be removed to avoid damage to your roof.

Now that you’ve done this, you could also consider contacting a professional roofing contractor for a thorough inspection. For safety reasons, it’s not recommended that a homeowner get on the roof. Leave that to the professionals. When your roofing contractor arrives, they are going to:
Examine the Shingles

Inspect your roof for shingles that look loose, cracked, curling or missing. Depending on what they find, you might need to have some work done. It is best to let a qualified roofer make any repairs to prevent costly damage or even more extensive repairs in the future. For more information about different types of shingle damage check out this "How To Read Your Roof" brochure.
Inspect Key Areas

A roofer will check the exterior of your chimney, skylights and plumbing vents for signs of damage and even wear to the boots and seals.

For your peace of mind and to avoid possible expensive future maintenance issues, calling an experienced roofer to perform a full roof inspection and maintenance is a good idea. If your roof is damaged by mother nature, take a look at your homeowner’s insurance policy, some policies may cover the costs of repair.
